1 
 
 
RBI/2020-21/74 
DoS.CO.CSITE.SEC.No.1852/31.01.015/2020-21                         February 18, 2021 
The Chairman/ Managing Director/ Chief Executive Officer 
All Scheduled Commercial Banks excluding RRBs/  
Small Finance Banks/Payments Banks/ Credit Card issuing NBFCs.  
 
 
Madam/ Dear Sir, 
Master Direction on Digital Payment Security Controls 
Please refer to para II (7) of the Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies 
of the Bi-monthly Monetary Policy Statement for 2020-21 dated December 4, 2020 
(extract given below). The Master Direction provides necessary guidelines for the 
regulated entities to set up a robust governance structure and implement common 
minimum standards of security controls for digital payment products and services.  
Yours faithfully, 
 
(T.K. Rajan) 
Chief General Manager 
 
Digital Payment Security Controls 
Going by the pre-eminent role being played by digital payment systems in India, RBI 
gives highest importance to the security controls around it. Now it is proposed to issue 
Reserve Bank of India (Digital Payment Security Controls) Directions 2020, for 
regulated entities to set up a robust governance structure for such systems and 
implement common minimum standards of security controls for channels like internet, 
mobile banking, card payments, among others. While the guidelines will be technology 
and platform agnostic, it will create an enhanced and enabling environment for 
customers to use digital payment products in more safe and secure manner. 
Necessary guidelines will be issued separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
 
 
 
Index 
Introduction 
Chapter I - Preliminary 
Short Title and Commencement 
Applicability 
Definitions 
Chapter II - General Controls 
Governance and Management of Security Risks 
Other Generic Security Controls 
Application Security Life Cycle (ASLC) 
 Authentication Framework 
Fraud Risk Management 
Reconciliation Mechanism 
Customer Protection, Awareness and Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
Chapter III - Internet Banking Security Controls 
Chapter IV - Mobile Payments Application Security Controls 
Chapter V - Card Payments Security 
Acronyms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
 
Master Direction on Digital Payment Security Controls 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In exercise of the powers conferred by the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 and Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007, the Reserve 
Bank, being satisfied that it is necessary and expedient in the public interest so to do, 
hereby, issues the directions hereinafter specified. 
CHAPTER – I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. Short Title and Commencement 
a. These directions shall be called the Reserve Bank of India (Digital Payment 
Security Controls) directions, 2021. 
b. These directions shall come into effect six months from the day they are placed 
on the official website of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). However, in respect 
of instructions already issued either by Department of Payment and Settlement 
Systems (DPSS), Department of Regulation (DoR) or Department of 
Supervision (DoS) of RBI including those to select Regulated Entities (REs), by 
way of circular or advisory, the timeline would be with immediate effect or as 
per the timelines already prescribed.   
2. Applicability 
The provisions of these directions shall apply to the following Regulated Entities (REs): 
a) Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks); 
b) Small Finance Banks;  
c) Payments Banks; and 
d) Credit card issuing NBFCs. 
3. Definitions 
All expressions unless defined herein shall have the same meaning as have been 
assigned to them under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, Reserve Bank of India Act, 
1934, Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 or Information Technology Act, 
2000/ Information Technology (Amendment) Act, 2008 and Rules made thereunder, 
any statutory modification or re-enactment thereto or as used in commercial parlance, 
as the case may be. 
 

4 
 
CHAPTER – II 
GENERAL CONTROLS 
Governance and Management of Security Risks 
4. REs shall formulate a policy for digital payment products and services with the 
approval of their Board. The contours of the policy, while discussing the parameters 
of any “new product” including its alignment with the overall business strategy and 
inherent risk of the product, risk management/ mitigation measures, compliance 
with regulatory instructions, customer experience, etc., should explicitly discuss 
about payment security requirements from Functionality, Security and Performance 
(FSP) angles such as:  
a) Necessary controls to protect the confidentiality of customer data and integrity 
of data and processes associated with the digital product/ services offered; 
b) Availability of requisite infrastructure e.g. human resources, technology, etc. 
with necessary back up; 
c) Assurance that the payment product is built in a secure manner offering robust 
performance ensuring safety, consistency and rolled out after necessary testing 
for achieving desired FSP;   
d) Capacity building and expansion with scalability (to meet the growth for efficient 
transaction processing);   
e) Minimal customer service disruption with high availability of systems/ channels 
(to have minimal technical declines); 
f) 
Efficient and effective dispute resolution mechanism and handling of customer 
grievance; and 
g) Adequate and appropriate review mechanism followed by swift corrective 
action, in case any one of the above requirements is hampered or having high 
potential to get hampered.  
 
The Board and Senior Management shall be responsible for implementation of this 
policy. The policy shall be reviewed periodically, at least on a yearly basis. REs may 
formulate this policy separately for its different digital products or include the same 
as part of their overall product policy. Further, the policy document should require 
that every digital payment product/ services offered addresses the mechanics, clear 
definition of starting point, critical intermittent stages/ points and end point in the 
digital payment cycle, security aspects, validations till the digital payment is settled, 
clear pictorial representation of digital path and exception handling. In addition, 
signing off of the above requirements, mechanism for carrying out User Acceptance 
Tests (UAT) in multiple stages before roll out, sign off from multiple stakeholders 
(post UAT) and data archival requirements shall also be taken in to account. The 
need for an external assessment of the entire process including the logic, build and 

5 
 
security aspects of the application(s) supporting the digital product should be clearly 
articulated.   
5. REs shall incorporate appropriate processes into their governance and risk 
management programs for identifying, analysing, monitoring and managing the 
specific risks, including compliance risk and fraud risk, associated with the portfolio 
of digital payment products and services on a continual basis and in a holistic 
manner. The Board/ Senior Management of REs shall have appropriate 
performance monitoring systems/ key performance indicators for assessing 
whether the product or service offered through digital payment channels meet 
operational and security norms. 
6. As part of this process, the REs shall define product-level limits on the level of 
acceptable security risk, document specific security objectives and performance 
criteria including quantitative benchmarks for evaluating the success of the security 
built into the digital payment product or service, periodically compare actual results 
with projections and qualitative benchmarks to detect and address adverse trends 
or concerns in a timely manner and modify the business plan/ strategy involving the 
product, when appropriate, based on the security performance of the product or 
service.  
7. REs shall have trained resources with necessary expertise to manage the digital 
payment infrastructure. Wherever the REs are dependent on third party service 
providers, adequate oversight and controls for monitoring the activities of the third 
party personnel, in line with RBI guidelines on outsourcing, shall be put in place.   
8. REs shall conduct risk assessments with regard to the safety and security of digital 
payment products and associated processes and services as well as suitability and 
appropriateness of the same vis-a-vis the target users, both prior to establishing the 
service(s) and regularly thereafter. The risk assessment should take into account – 
a) The technology stack and solutions used; 
b) Known vulnerabilities at each of the touchpoints of the digital product and the 
remedial action taken by the entity; 
c) Dependence on third party service providers and oversight over such providers; 
d) Risk arising out of integration of digital payment platform with other systems 
both internal and external to the RE, including core systems and systems of 
payment systems operators, etc.; 
e) The customer experience, convenience and technology adoption required to 
use such products; 
f) 
Reconciliation process; 
g) Interoperability aspects; 
h) Data storage, security and privacy protection as per extant laws/ instructions; 

6 
 
i) 
Operational risk including fraud risk; 
j) 
Business continuity and service availability; 
k) Compliance with extant cyber security requirements; and  
l) 
Compatibility aspects. 
 
Such assessment shall cover the surrounding ecosystem as well. The assessment 
of risks shall address the need to protect and secure payment data1 and evaluate 
the resilience of systems. The internal Risk and Control Self-Assessment (RCSA) 
exercise shall cover the risks (inherent) & controls vis-à-vis the probability and 
impact of threats to arrive at residual risk. In such an exercise, it is imperative for 
REs to maintain database of all systems and applications storing customer data in 
the payment ecosystem and compliance with applicable PCI standards in each of 
the systems (notwithstanding mandatory requirements of certification/ standard 
accreditation).   
9. REs shall evaluate the risks associated with the chosen technology platforms, 
application architecture, both on the server and client side. Further, REs should 
undertake a review of the risk scenarios and existing security measures based on 
incidents affecting their services, before any major change to the infrastructure or 
procedures is made or, when, any new threats are identified through risk monitoring 
activities. Further, unused or unwanted features of the platform should be closely 
controlled to minimise risk. 
10. REs shall develop sound internal control systems and take into account the 
operational risk before offering digital payment products and related services. This 
would include ensuring that adequate safeguards are in place to protect integrity of 
data, customer confidentiality and security of data.   
11. REs shall ensure that the digital payment architecture is robust and scalable, 
commensurate with the transaction volumes and customer growth. The IT strategy 
of the RE shall ensure that a robust capacity management plan is in place to meet 
evolving demand. REs shall also put in place review mechanism of IT/ IT Security 
architecture and technology platform overhaul on a periodic basis based on Board-
approved policy. 
12. REs shall have necessary capacity, systems and procedures in place to periodically 
test the backed-up data, application pertaining to digital products to ensure recovery 
                                                           
1 customer data; customer and beneficiary account details; payment credentials; transaction data; 

7 
 
without loss of transactions or audit-trails. These facilities should be tested at least 
on a half-yearly basis for digital payment products and services.   
Other Generic Security Controls 
13. The communication protocol in the digital payment channels (especially over 
Internet) shall adhere to a secure standard.  An appropriate level of encryption and 
security shall be implemented in the digital payment ecosystem. 
14. Web applications providing the digital payment products and services should not 
store sensitive information in HTML hidden fields, cookies, or any other client-side 
storage to avoid any compromise in the integrity of the data.  
15. REs shall implement Web Application Firewall (WAF) solution and DDoS mitigation 
techniques to secure the digital payment products and services offered over 
Internet.   
16. The key length (for symmetric/ asymmetric encryption, hashing), algorithms (for 
encryption, signing, exchange of keys, creation of message digest, random number 
generators), cipher suites, digital certificates and applicable protocols used in 
transmission channels, processing of data, authentication purpose, shall be strong, 
adopting internationally accepted and published standards that are not deprecated/ 
demonstrated to be insecure/ vulnerable and the configurations involved in 
implementing such controls are in general, compliant with extant instructions and 
the law of the land. 
17. REs shall renew their digital certificates used in digital payment ecosystem well in 
time. 
18. The mobile application2 and internet banking application should have effective 
logging and monitoring capabilities to track user activity, security changes and 
identify anomalous behaviour and transactions. 
Application Security Life Cycle (ASLC) 
19. REs shall implement multi-tier application architecture, segregating application, 
database and presentation layer in the digital payment products and services. 
20. REs shall follow a ‘secure by design’ approach in the development of digital 
payment products and services. REs shall ensure that digital payment applications 
are inherently more secure by embedding security within their development 
lifecycle.  
                                                           
2 Mobile banking, mobile payment applications of the regulated entities 

8 
 
21. REs shall explicitly define security objectives (including protection of customer 
information/ data) during (a) requirements gathering, (b) designing, (c) 
development, (d) testing including source code review, (e) implementation, 
maintenance & monitoring and (f) decommissioning phases of the digital payment 
applications. 
22. REs (including those partnering with other entities to co-brand/ co-develop 
applications) shall adopt and incorporate a threat modelling approach during 
application lifecycle management into their policies, processes, guidelines and 
procedures. 
23. For digital payment applications that are licensed by a third party vendor, REs shall 
have an escrow arrangement for the source code for ensuring continuity of services 
in case the vendor defaults or is unable to provide services. 
24. REs shall conduct security testing including review of source code, Vulnerability 
Assessment (VA) and Penetration Testing (PT) of their digital payment applications 
to assure that the application is secure for putting through transactions while 
preserving confidentiality and integrity of the data that is stored and transmitted. 
Such testing should invariably cover compliance with various standards like 
OWASP.  If the source code is not owned by the RE, then, in such cases, the RE 
shall obtain a certificate from the application developer stating that the application 
is free of known vulnerabilities, malwares and any covert channels in the code. In 
this context, 
a) The VA shall be conducted at least on a half-yearly basis; PT shall be 
conducted at least on a yearly basis. In addition, VA/PT shall be conducted as 
and when any new IT Infrastructure or digital payment application is introduced 
or when any major change is performed in application or infrastructure; 
b) Testing related to review of source code/ certification shall be conducted/ 
obtained. This shall continue on a yearly  basis, if changes/ upgrades have been 
made to the application during the year; 
c) Testing/ Certification should broadly address the objective that the product/ 
version/module(s) functions only in a manner that it is intended to do, is 
developed as per the best secure design/ coding practices and standards, 
addressing known flaws/threats due to insecure coding; and 
d) Penal provisions shall be included by the RE into third-party contractual 
arrangements for any non-compliance by the application provider. 
 
25. REs may also run automated VA scanning tools to automatically scan all systems 
on the network that are critical, public facing or store customer sensitive data on a 
continuous/ more frequent basis. 

9 
 
26. REs shall compare the results from earlier vulnerability scans to verify/ ascertain 
that vulnerabilities are addressed either by patching, implementing a compensating 
control, or documenting and accepting the residual risk with necessary approval 
and that there is no recurrence of the known vulnerabilities. The identified 
vulnerabilities should be fixed in a time-bound manner. 
27. REs shall ensure that all vulnerability scanning is performed in authenticated mode 
either with agents running locally on the system to analyse the security configuration 
or with remote scanners that are given administrative rights on the system being 
tested.3 
28. REs shall verify and thoroughly test the functionality (to validate whether the system 
meets the functional requirements/ specifications) and security controls of payment 
products and services before its launch/ moving to the production environment.  
29. REs shall institute a mechanism to actively monitor for the non-genuine/ 
unauthorised/ malicious applications (with similar name/ features) on popular app-
stores and the Web and respond accordingly to bring them down. 
30. The server at the RE’s end should have adequate checks and balances to ensure 
that no transaction is carried out through non-genuine/ unauthorised digital payment 
products/ applications and the authentication process is robust, secure and 
centralised. 
31.  The security controls for digital payment applications must focus on how these 
applications handle, store and protect payment data. The APIs for secure data 
storage and communication have to be implemented and used correctly in order to 
be effective. REs shall refer to standards such as OWASP-MASVS, OWASP-ASVS 
and other relevant OWASP standards, security and data protection guidelines in 
ISO 12812, threat catalogues and guides developed by NIST (including for 
Bluetooth and LTE security), for application security and other protection measures. 
Such testing has to necessarily verify for vulnerabilities including, but not limited to 
OWASP/ OWASP Mobile Top 10, application security guidelines/ requirements 
developed/ shared by operating system providers/ OEMs.  
32. REs shall redact/ mask customer information such as account numbers/ card 
numbers/ other sensitive information when transmitted via SMS/ e-mails.   
 
                                                           
3 SANS Critical Security Controls 

10 
 
Authentication Framework 
33. In view of the proliferation of cyber-attacks and their potential consequences, REs 
should implement, except where explicitly permitted/ relaxed, multi-factor 
authentication for payments through electronic modes and fund transfers, including 
cash withdrawals from ATMs/ micro-ATMs/ business correspondents, through 
digital payment applications. At least one of the authentication methodologies 
should be generally dynamic or non-replicable. [e.g., Use of One Time Password, 
mobile devices (device binding and SIM), biometric/ PKI/ hardware tokens, EMV 
chip card (for Card Present Transactions) with server-side verification could be 
termed either in dynamic or non-replicable methodologies.]. 
34. REs may also adopt adaptive authentication to select the right authentication factors 
depending on risk assessment, user risk profile and behaviour. Properly designed 
and implemented multi-factor authentication methods are more reliable and 
stronger fraud deterrents and are more difficult to compromise. The key objectives 
of multi-factor authentication are to protect the confidentiality of payment data as 
well as enhance confidence in digital payment by combating various cyber-attack 
mechanisms like phishing, keylogging, spyware/ malware and other internet-based 
frauds targeted at REs and their customers. In this regard,  
a) The implementation of appropriate authentication methodologies should be 
based on an assessment of the risk posed by the RE’s digital payment products 
and services. The risk should be evaluated in light of the type of customer (e.g., 
retail/ corporate/ commercial); the customer transactional requirements/ pattern 
(e.g., bill payment, fund transfer), the sensitivity of customer information and 
the volume, value of transactions involved. 
 
b) Beyond the technology factor, the success of a particular authentication method 
depends on appropriate policies, procedures, and controls. An effective 
authentication method should take into consideration customer acceptance, 
ease of use, reliable performance, scalability to accommodate growth, 
customer profile, location, transaction, etc., and interoperability with other 
systems. 
 
c) To enhance online processing security, multi factor authentication and alerts 
(like SMS, e-mail, etc.) should be applied in respect of all payment transactions 
(including debits and credits), creation of new account linkages (addition/ 
modification/ deletion of beneficiaries), changing account details or revision to 
fund transfer limits. In devising these security features, REs should take into 
account their efficacy and differing customer preferences for additional online 
protection. 
 
d) The alerts and OTPs received by the customer for online transactions shall 
identify the merchant name, wherever applicable, rather than the payment 
aggregator through which the transaction was effected.    

11 
 
 
e) As an integral part of the multi factor authentication architecture, REs should 
also implement appropriate measures to minimise exposure to a middleman 
attack which is more commonly known as a man-in-the-middle attack (MITM), 
man-in-the browser (MITB) attack or man-in-the application attack. This is to 
ensure, among other things, that the data in transit is secured and the 
transactions are authenticated only by genuine/ authorised source/ process.  
 
f) 
An authenticated session, together with its encryption protocol, should remain 
intact throughout the interaction with the customer. Else, in the event of 
interference or in case the customer closes the application, the session should 
be terminated, and the affected transactions resolved or reversed out. The 
customer should be promptly notified about the status of the transaction by 
email, SMS or through other means. 
 
35. REs should set down the maximum number of failed log-in or authentication 
attempts after which access to the digital payment product/ service is blocked. They 
should have a secure procedure in place to re-activate the access to blocked 
product/ service. The customer shall be notified for failed log-in or authentication 
attempts. 
Fraud Risk Management 
36. The REs shall document and implement the configuration aspects for identifying 
suspicious transactional behaviour in respect of rules, preventive, detective types 
of controls, mechanism to alert the customers in case of failed authentication, time 
frame for the same, etc.   
37. System alerts shall be parameterised and monitored in terms of various applicable 
parameters. Such parameters, as applicable could be: transaction velocity (e.g.,  
fund transfers, cash withdrawals, payments through electronic modes, adding new 
beneficiaries, etc.) in a short period, more so in the accounts of customers who’ve 
never used mobile app/ internet banking/ card ever (depending upon the type of 
payment channel), high risk merchant category codes (MCC) parameters, 
counterfeit card parameters (String of Invalid CVV/ PINs indicates an account 
generation attack), new account parameters (excessive activity on a new account), 
time zones, geo-locations, IP address origin (in respect of unusual patterns, 
prohibited zones/ rogue IPs), behavioural biometrics, transaction origination from 
point of compromise, transactions to mobile wallets/ mobile numbers/ VPAs on 
whom vishing fraud or other types of fraud is/are registered/ recorded, declined 
transactions, transactions with no approval code, etc.  

12 
 
38. Fraud analysis shall be conducted to identify the reason for fraud occurrence and 
determine mechanism to prevent such frauds.  
39. The staff, especially in the fraud control function, shall be educated about frauds 
and trained in the following skills and areas of expertise:   
a) Fraud control tools and their usage; 
b) Investigative techniques and procedures; 
c) Cardholder and merchant education techniques to prevent fraud; 
d) Scheme/ Card operating regulations; 
e) Data processing and analysis and liaising or communicating with law 
enforcement agencies; and 
f) 
The requisite skills required to (i) set and update appropriate rules, (ii) monitor 
the exceptions thrown based on the rules on a continuous basis and take 
necessary actions promptly, (iii) communicate/ escalate wherever required to 
appropriate authorities, and (iv) differentiate false positives from the rest. 
 
40. REs shall maintain updated contact details of service providers, intermediaries, 
external agencies and other stakeholders (including other REs) for coordination in 
incident response. REs shall put in place a mechanism with the stakeholders to 
update and verify such contact details.  REs shall also formulate specific SOPs to 
handle incidents related to payment ecosystem to mitigate the loss either to the 
customer or RE.   
Reconciliation Mechanism 
41. A real time/ near-real time (not later than 24 hours from the time of receipt of 
settlement file(s)) reconciliation framework for all digital payment transactions 
between RE and all other stakeholders such as payment system operators, 
business correspondents, card networks, payment system processors, payment 
aggregators, payment gateways, third party technology service providers, other 
participants, etc., shall be put in place for better detection and prevention of 
suspicious transactions. A mechanism shall be introduced to monitor the 
implementation and effectiveness of such framework.   
Customer Protection, Awareness and Grievance Redressal Mechanism 
42. REs shall incorporate secure, safe and responsible usage guidelines and training 
materials for end users within the digital payment applications. They shall also make 
it mandatory (i.e. not providing any option to circumvent/ avoid the material) for the 
consumer to go through secure usage guidelines (even in the consumer’s preferred 
language) while obtaining and recording confirmation during the on-boarding 

13 
 
procedure in the first instance and first use after each update of the digital payment 
application or after major updates to secure and safe usage guidelines. 
43. REs shall mention/ incorporate a section on the digital payment application clearly 
specifying the process and procedure (with forms/ contact information, etc.) to lodge 
consumer grievances. A mechanism to keep this information periodically updated 
shall also be put in place. The reporting facility on the application shall provide an 
option for registering a grievance. Customer dispute handling, reporting and 
resolution procedures, including the expected timelines for the RE's response 
should be clearly defined.  
44.  REs shall adhere to extant instructions4, updated from time to time, to put in place 
system/s for online dispute resolution for resolving disputes and grievances of 
customers pertaining to digital payments. 
45. REs shall educate customers about the need to maintain the physical and logical 
security of their devices accessing digital payment products and services including 
recommending secure/ regular installation of operating system and application 
updates, downloading applications only from authorised sources, having anti-
malware/ anti-virus applications on devices, etc. 
46. REs shall ensure that its customers are provided information about the risks, 
benefits and liabilities of using digital payment products and its related services 
before they subscribe to them. Customers shall also be informed clearly and 
precisely on their rights, obligations and responsibilities on matters relating to digital 
payments, and, any problems that may arise from its service unavailability, 
processing errors and security breaches. The terms and conditions including 
customer privacy and security policy applying to digital payment products and 
services shall be readily available to customers within the product. All digital 
channels are to be offered on express willingness of customers and shall not be 
bundled without their knowledge. 
47.  Whenever new operating features or functions, particularly those relating to 
security, integrity and authentication, are introduced to online delivery channels, 
                                                           
4 RBI/2020-21/21 DPSS.CO.PD No.116/02.12.004/2020-21 circular dated August 6, 2020 on ‘Online Dispute Resolution (ODR) 
System for Digital Payments’ 
 

14 
 
clear and effective communication followed by sufficient instructions to properly 
utilise such new features should be provided to the customers. 
48.  REs may continuously create public awareness on the types of threats and attacks 
used against the consumers while using digital payment products and 
precautionary measures to safeguard against the same. Customers shall be 
cautioned against commonly known threats in recent times like phishing, vishing, 
reverse-phishing, remote access of mobile devices and educated to secure and 
safeguard their account details, credentials, PIN, card details, devices, etc.  
49. REs shall provide digital payment products and services, to a customer only at her/ 
his option based on specific written or authenticated electronic requisition along with 
a positive acknowledgement of the terms and conditions.   
50. REs should provide a mechanism on their mobile and internet banking application 
for their customers to, with necessary authentication, identify/ mark a transaction 
as fraudulent for seamless and immediate notification to his RE. On such 
notification by the customer, the REs may endeavour to build the capability for 
seamless/ instant reporting of fraudulent transactions to the corresponding 
beneficiary/ counterparty’s RE; vice-versa have mechanism to receive such 
fraudulent transactions reported from other REs. The objective of this mechanism 
is to accelerate early detection and enable the banking/ payment system to trace 
the transaction trail and mitigate the loss to the defrauded customer at the earliest 
possible time.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

15 
 
 
Chapter III 
INTERNET BANKING SECURITY CONTROLS 
In addition to the controls prescribed in Chapter II, the following instructions are 
applicable to REs offering/ intending to offer internet banking facility to their customers: 
51. Internet banking websites are vulnerable to authentication related brute force 
attacks/ application layer Denial of Service (DoS) attacks. Based on the RE’s 
individual risk/ vulnerability assessment on authentication-related attacks such as 
brute force/ DoS attacks, REs shall implement additional levels of authentication to 
internet banking website such as adaptive authentication, strong CAPTCHA 
(preferably with anti-bot features) with server-side validation, etc., in order to plug 
this vulnerability and prevent its exploitation. Appropriate measures shall be taken 
to prevent DNS cache poisoning attacks and for secure handling of cookies. Virtual 
keyboard option should be made available. 
52. An online session shall be automatically terminated after a fixed period of inactivity. 
53. Secure delivery of password for login purpose shall be ensured. The password 
generated and dispatched by the RE should be valid for a limited period from the 
date of its creation. If the password is generated and dispatched by the RE, then, 
the user shall be compulsorily required to change the password, on the first login.    
54. When the internet banking application is accessed through external websites (eg: 
in case of payment of taxes, e-commerce transactions, etc.), the procedure for 
authentication and the appearance/ look and feel of the RE’s internet banking site 
should be made uniform as far as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
Chapter IV 
MOBILE PAYMENTS APPLICATION SECURITY CONTROLS   
In addition to the controls prescribed in Chapter II, the following instructions are 
applicable to the REs offering/ intending to offer mobile banking/ mobile payments 
facility to their customers through mobile application: 
55. On detection of any anomalies or exceptions for which the mobile application was 
not programmed, the customer shall be directed to remove the current copy/ 
instance of the application and proceed with installation of a new copy/ instance of 
the application. REs shall be able to verify the version of the mobile application 
before the transactions are enabled.  
56. Specific Controls for mobile applications include: 
a) Device policy enforcement (allowing app installation/ execution after baseline 
requirements are met); 
b) Application secure download/ install;  
c) Deactivating older application versions in a phased but time bound manner (not 
exceeding six months from the date of release of newer version) i.e., 
maintaining only one version (excluding the overlap period while phasing out 
older version) of the mobile application on a platform/ operating system;  
d) Storage of customer data;  
e) Device or application encryption;  
f) 
Ensuring minimal data collection/ app permissions;  
g) Application sandbox/ containerisation;  
h) Ability to identify remote access applications (to the extent possible) and 
prohibit login access to the mobile application, as a matter of precaution; and  
i) 
Code obfuscation. 
 
57. REs may consider to perform validation on the security and compatibility condition 
of the device/ operating system and the mobile application to ensure that activities 
relating to the account are put through the mobile application in a safe and secure 
manner.   
58. REs may explore the feasibility of implementing a code that checks if the device is 
rooted/ jailbroken prior to the installation of the mobile application and disallow the 
mobile application to install/ function if the phone is rooted/ jailbroken. 
59. Checksum of current active version of application shall be hosted on public platform 
so that users can verify the same. 
 

17 
 
60. REs shall ensure device binding of mobile application5.  
61. Considering that the additional factor of authentication and mobile application may 
reside on the same mobile device in the case of mobile banking, mobile payments, 
REs may consider implementing alternatives to SMS-based OTP authentication 
mechanisms.   
62. The mobile application should require re-authentication whenever the device or 
application remains unused for a designated period and each time the user 
launches the application. Applications must be able to identify new network 
connections or connections from unsecured networks like unsecured Wi-Fi 
connections and must implement appropriate authentication/ checks/ measures to 
perform transactions under those circumstances. 
63. The mobile application should not store/ retain sensitive personal/ consumer 
authentication information such as user IDs, passwords, keys, hashes, hard coded 
references on the device and the application should securely wipe any sensitive 
customer information from memory when the customer/ user exits the application. 
64. REs shall ensure that their mobile application limit the writing of sensitive 
information into ‘temp’ files. The sensitive information written in such files must be 
suitably encrypted/ masked/ hashed and stored securely. 
65. REs may consider designing anti-malware capabilities into their mobile 
applications.  
66. REs shall ensure that the usage of raw (visible) SQL queries in mobile applications 
to fetch or update data from databases is avoided. Mobile applications should be 
secured from SQL injection type of vulnerabilities. Sensitive information should be 
written to the database in an encrypted form. Web content, as part of the mobile 
application’s layout, should not be loaded if errors are detected during SSL/ TLS 
negotiation. Certificate errors on account of the certificate not being signed by a 
recognised certificate authority; expiry/ revocation of the certificate must be 
displayed to the user. 
 
                                                           
5  The device binding should be preferably implemented through a combination of hardware, software and service information.  
In case, the RE allows multiple devices to be registered, then, (a) the user must be notified of every new device registration on 
multiple channels such as registered mobile number, email or phone call and (b) in relation to the mobile application, RE must 
maintain a record of all registered devices, providing the user a facility to disable a registered device. 

18 
 
Chapter V 
CARD PAYMENTS SECURITY 
In addition to the controls prescribed in Chapter II, the following instructions are 
applicable to the REs offering/ intending to issue cards (credit/ debit/ prepaid) (physical 
or virtual) to their customers:  
67. REs shall follow various payment card standards (over and above PCI-DSS and 
PA-DSS6) as per Payment Card Industry (PCI) prescriptions for comprehensive 
payment card security as per applicability/ readiness of updated versions of the 
standards such as – 
a) PCI-PIN (secure management, processing, and transmission of personal 
identification number (PIN) data); 
b) PCI-PTS (security approval framework addresses the logical and/ or physical 
protection of cardholder and other sensitive data at point of interaction (POI) 
devices and hardware security modules (HSMs); 
c) PCI-HSM (securing cardholder-authentication applications and processes 
including key generation, key injection, PIN verification, secure encryption 
algorithm, etc.); and 
d) PCI-P2PE (security standard that requires payment card information to be 
encrypted instantly upon its initial swipe and then securely transferred directly 
to the payment processor). 
68. REs should ensure that terminals installed at the merchants for capturing card 
details for payments or otherwise are validated against the PCI-P2PE program to 
use PCI-approved P2PE solutions; PoS terminals with PIN entry installed at the 
merchants for capturing card payments (including the double swipe terminals) are 
approved by the PCI-PTS program. 
69. Acquirers shall secure their card payment infrastructure (Unique Key Per Terminal 
– UKPT or Derived Unique Key Per Transaction – DUKPT/ Terminal Line 
Encryption – TLE).    
70. The security controls to be implemented at HSM are: 
a) The HSMs should have logging enabled, the logs must themselves be tamper 
proof;  
b) HSM can become a single point of failure. This needs to be mitigated by 
‘clustering’ for high availability and ensure secure backups;  
c) Access to the HSM should be controlled through Access Control Lists (ACLs);  
d) Separate ACLs should be maintained for each individual application to ensure 
application level isolation;  
e) All access to HSM should be managed and monitored using a robust Privileged 
Identity and Access Management solution; 
f) 
Decryption and validation of keys, PIN should be done at HSM; 
                                                           
6 PCI Secure Software Standard, a PCI standard within PCI Software Security Framework (SSF) will replace PA-DSS as the 
primary standard for securing payment software in 2022. (ref: PCI security standards website) 

19 
 
g) Card PIN generation and printing should be directly at system connected HSM; 
h) CVV generation and validation should be done at HSM;  
i) 
Ensure HSM is implemented with secure PIN block format with controls to 
disable outputting PIN block in weaker format; 
j) 
Secure key management for HSMs (such as LMKs, etc.); and 
k) Security of the physical keys of the HSM device should be properly maintained. 
 
71. REs shall implement the following for improving the security posture of the ATM: 
a) Implement security measures such as BIOS password, disabling USB ports, 
disabling auto-run facility, applying the latest patches of operating system and 
other softwares, terminal security solution, time-based admin access, etc;   
b) Implement anti-skimming and whitelisting solution; and 
c) Upgrade all the ATMs with supported versions of operating system. Use of 
ATMs that have unsupported operating systems shall be prohibited. 
 
72. REs shall ensure robust surveillance/ monitoring of card transactions (especially 
overseas cash withdrawals) and setting up of rules and limits commensurate with 
their risk appetites. REs shall take up with the card network and/ or ATM network 
as the case may be, to put in place transaction limits at Card, BIN as well as at the 
RE level. Such limits shall be mandatorily set at the card network switch itself. Limits 
could be mandated both for domestic as well as international transactions 
separately. REs shall put in place transaction control mechanisms with necessary 
caps (restrictions on transactions), if any of the limits set as per the above 
requirement is breached. A periodic review mechanism of such limits set as per the 
risk appetite of the RE shall be put in place as per the Board-approved policy. REs 
shall institute a mechanism to monitor breaches, if any, on a 24x7 basis, including 
weekends, long holidays and put in place a robust incident response mechanism to 
mitigate the fraud loss, on account of suspicious transactions, if any. REs shall 
ensure that card details of the customers are not stored in plain text at the RE and 
its vendor(s) locations, systems and applications. REs shall also ensure that the 
processing of card details in readable format is performed in a secure manner to 
strictly avoid data leakage of sensitive customer information. 
73. REs that use card data scanning tools to identify unencrypted (clear text) payments 
card data in their ecosystem especially during audits shall adhere to the following 
safety measures:  
a) Any tool (procured by/ from a third-party) for the purpose of scanning of 
unencrypted card data should first be tested in a test environment to understand 
the scope and impact of the tool’s capabilities;  
b) The scanning tool should be installed only in the RE's premises on their devices; 
c) Card data scanning should not be done remotely; 

20 
 
d) The discovered data, if any, must preferably reside in the scanning tool. 
Exportable card data must be appropriately masked. (No data, even masked, 
must be taken out of the RE’s premises/ infrastructure); and 
e) Limited access to service providers to conduct the scan or analyse the data, if 
at all, must be provided only on the RE’s devices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
 
Acronyms 
ACL 
 
Access Control List 
ASLC  
Application Security Life Cycle 
ATM 
 
Automated Teller Machine 
BIN 
 
Bank Identification Number 
BIOS  
Basic Input/ Output System 
CAPTCHA 
 
Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and 
Humans Apart 
CVV 
 
Card Verification Value 
DDoS  
Distributed Denial of Service 
DNS 
 
Domain Name Server 
DoR 
Department of Regulation 
DoS 
 
Department of Supervision 
DPSS  
Department of Payment and Settlement Systems 
DUKPT 
 
Derived Unique Key per Transaction 
EMV 
 
Europay, Mastercard, and Visa 
FSP 
Functionality, Security and Performance 
HSM  
Hardware Security Module 
HTML  
HyperText Markup Language 
IP 
 
Internet Protocol 
IT 
 
Information Technology 
IVR 
 
Interactive Voice Response 
LMK 
Local Master Key 
MCC  
Merchant Category Code 
MITB  
Man-in-The Browser attack 
MITM  
Man-In-the-Middle attack 
NIST  
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
OEM  
Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OTP 
 
One Time Password 
OWASP 
 
Open Web Application Security Project 
OWASP-ASVS 
 
Open Web Application Security Project – Application Security 
Verification Standard 
OWASP-MASVS 
 
Open Web Application Security Project – Mobile Application 
Security Verification Standard 
PA-DSS 
 
Payment Application Data Security Standard 

22 
 
PCI 
 
Payment Card Industry 
PCI-DSS 
 
Payment Card Industry-Data Security Standard 
PCI-HSM  
Payment Card Industry-Hardware Security Module 
PCI-P2PE 
 
Payment Card Industry-Point to Point Encryption 
PCI-PTS  
Payment Card Industry-PIN Transaction Security 
PIN 
 
Personal Identification Number 
PKI 
 
Public Key Infrastructure 
PoS 
 
Point of Sale 
PT 
Penetration Testing 
RBI 
 
Reserve Bank of India 
RCSA  
Risk Control Self-Assessment 
REs 
 
Regulated Entities 
SIM 
 
Subscriber Identification Module 
SOP 
 
Standard Operating Procedure 
SQL 
 
Structured Query Language 
SSL 
 
Secure Socket Layer 
TLE 
 
Terminal Line Encryption 
TLS 
 
Transport Layer Security 
UAT 
User Acceptance Test 
UKPT  
Unique Key Per terminal 
USB 
 
Universal Serial Bus 
VA 
Vulnerability Assessment 
VPA 
 
Virtual Payment Address 
WAF  
Web Application Firewall 
 

